+++
title = "The society of the spectacle"
date = "2022-11-26T20:13:23Z"
author = "ssamot"
tags = ["Marxism", ""]
description = "...and religion"
+++

["The Society of the Spectacle"](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/debord/society.htm) is a collection of aphorisms put together by [Guy Debord](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guy_Debord); quite a few of them has stood the test of them, but one that caught my eye is on the apocalyptic vision of monotheistic religions. Transhumanism was to play the same role in the modern world, but it had died a horrible death. It is now rather clear I think that technologies that are to radically change the human condition (beyond methods of social engineering) lie beyond this century. No eminent end of history (again).

> The monotheistic religions were a compromise between myth and history, between cyclical time which still dominated production and irreversible time where populations clash and regroup. The religions which grew out of Judaism are abstract universal acknowledgements of irreversible time which is democratized, opened to all, but in the realm of illusion. Time is totally oriented toward a single final event: **“The Kingdom of God is at hand.”** These religions arose on the soil of history, and established themselves there. But there they still preserve themselves in radical opposition to history. Semi-historical religion establishes a qualitative point of departure in time (the birth of Christ, the flight of Mohammed), but its irreversible time–introducing real accumulation which in Islam can take the form of a conquest, or in Reformation Christianity the form of increased capital is actually inverted in religious thought and becomes a countdown: the hope of access to the genuine other world before time runs out, the expectation of the last Judgment. Eternity came out of cyclical time and is beyond it. Eternity is the element which holds back the irreversibility of time, suppressing history within history itself by placing itself on the other side of irreversible time as a pure punctual element to which cyclical time returned and abolished itself. Bossuet will still say: “And by means of the time that passes we enter into the eternity which does not pass.”
